## An investigation into the state of the European emissions market; is the European Union's Emissions Trading Scheme effective in reducing emissions in the aviation sector?

For my master thesis, I investigated the effectiveness of the European Union’s Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS) in reducing greenhouse gas emissions (hereafter, emissions) within the aviation sector. The EU ETS is designed to support European industries in their transition to carbon neutrality by 2050. It does so by setting a cap on total emissions across industries and gradually lowering this cap by a fixed percentage each year. Companies must purchase allowances for each ton of emissions they produce, incorporating emissions into the cost of production. As the total cap decreases, the number of allowances shrinks, which — assuming stable demand — drives up their price. This creates a financial incentive for companies to reduce their emissions.

Besides these planned reductions, the European Union has periodically adjusted the scheme. For example, an announcement that an additional number of allowances will be removed in the next year. Considering that the EU ETS is designed to reduce emissions through financial incentives, the effectiveness of the scheme depends on whether such reductions lead to a change in price. This research therefore determines whether the (future) price of allowances are affected by policy changes from the European Union.

**What distinguishes this research**  
This research distinguishes itself from existing literature in two ways. First, it uses multiple announcement dates for each policy change. The amendment process of European legislation consists of multiple stages in which different parties can propose revisions. These revisions have their own announcements. This means that, between the initial announcement of the proposed policy change and the final version, there could be months. Despite this, most event studies regarding the EU ETS only use the final announcement date — when the outcome of the vote is published. This research investigates whether the market incorporates the information provided by these earlier announcements. The list of [policy changes](data/policy_changes.pdf) that affect the aviation sector and the accompanying [announcement dates](data/announcements.pdf) are provided.

Second, this research limits itself to policy changes that affect the aviation sector. Amongst the sectors covered by the EU ETS, the commercial aviation industry holds a unique status; it is the only sector with its own allowance, known as European Union Aviation Allowances (EUAA). EUAAs cannot be exchanged for general allowances, meaning that the commercial aviation sector — unlike all other sectors — cannot trade allowances across sectors. There is, therefore, no (direct) spillover effect, meaning that any change in price or volatility on the announcement date of a policy change of the EU ETS is a perfect proxy for the sector's reaction towards this change.

### **Erasmus University, Rotterdam** — Pepijn de Roock
*For both the methodology and the results I would like to refer to my [thesis](thesis.pdf) (31 pages). It is also available in the [Erasmus University Thesis Repository](https://thesis.eur.nl/pub/71921). This is, however, not accessible to non-Erasmus students.*
